Single-cell data transformation documentation (#193)
genestack/user-docs: docs/user-guide/doc-odm-user-guide/about-sc-hdf5-transformations.md

Reviewer: Exactly how explanation is supposed to look like: no instructions, no reference tables, no procedural steps.

> # About Single-Cell HDF5 Transformations in ODM

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Single-Cell HDF5 Transformations Overview
```

> > **Related documentation:** For step-by-step guidance on running the transformation, see the [How-to Guides](how-to-sc-hdf5-transformations.md). For the full configuration schema, see the [Configuration Reference](configuration-reference.md). For the API endpoints, see the [API Reference](api-reference.md). For the internal processing pipeline, see the [Transformation Process Reference](transformation-process-reference.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Related documentation:** For step-by-step guidance on running the transformation, see the [How-to Guides](how-to-sc-hdf5-transformations.md). For the full configuration schema, see the [Configuration Reference](configuration-reference.md). For the API endpoints, see the [API Reference](api-reference.md). For the internal processing pipeline, see the [Transformation Process Reference](transformation-process-reference.md). For more information related the Single-cell data support in ODM, see the [Working with Single Cell Data](single-cell.md)
```

> Single-cell datasets are commonly distributed as HDF5-based files — most often H5AD (the AnnData format) or the 10x Genomics H5 format. While these formats are rich and expressive, they are not directly ingestible into ODM in a way that supports consistent indexing, cross-dataset search, and the entity relationships that ODM relies on for downstream discovery.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This transformation converts a single-cell HDF5 file into the ODM-compatible output files. It extracts expression data and related cell metadata, and can optionally harmonize metadata and create or update biosample objects in ODM. The output files are then imported and linked automatically.
```

> The single-cell HDF5 transformation exists to bridge this gap. Rather than requiring users to hand-craft intermediate files or manually restructure their data, the transformation automates the entire end-to-end process: reading the source file, extracting and optionally curating the relevant metadata, and uploading the results as structured ODM objects.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The result is feature-level indexed data that is ready for downstream analysis and cross-study discovery without manual file preparation.
```

> ## The ODM entity model for single-cell data

Reviewer 2: I would suggest to remove this section, since it is related to the Single-cell data in general, not to the described transformation.

I added another link in the Related documentation section instead.

Author: Agreed! Thanks for the suggestion

## What the transformation reads from the source file

The transformation extracts three distinct types of data from a single HDF5 source file:

**Cell metadata** comes primarily from the `obs` slot of an H5AD file (or its equivalent in a 10x H5 file). This includes per-cell annotations such as barcodes, cluster assignments, quality control metrics, and any experimental annotations attached to individual cells. Multidimensional representations (such as PCA or UMAP coordinates stored in `obsm`) and pairwise cell annotations (from `obsp`) can also be extracted.

**Feature metadata** comes from `var` (and optionally `varm` and `varp`). This includes per-gene annotations such as gene identifiers and names. The transformation can automatically map Ensembl or NCBI gene IDs to gene names for supported species, avoiding the need to pre-process gene annotation separately.

**The expression matrix** is the count or normalized values matrix (`X`). The transformation validates its dimensions against the extracted cell and feature metadata, then writes it in a Brotli-compressed format optimised for ODM ingestion.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The transformation extracts three types of data from a HDF5 source file:

**Cell metadata** — extracted primarily from the `obs` in H5AD input file, or the equivalent structure in 10x H5 input. This includes per-cell annotations such as barcodes, cluster assignments, quality control metrics, and any other experimental annotations. Multidimensional representations stored in `obsm` (such as PCA or UMAP coordinates) and pairwise cell annotations from `obsp` can also be extracted.

**Feature metadata** — extracted from `var`, and optionally from `varm` and `varp`. This includes per-gene annotations such as gene identifiers and gene names. For supported species, the transformation can also map Ensembl or NCBI gene identifiers to gene names automatically.

**The expression matrix** — extracted from `X`, which contains count or normalized expression values. The transformation validates the matrix dimensions against the extracted cell and feature metadata, then writes the matrix in a Brotli-compressed format optimized for ODM ingestion.
```

> ## The role of metadata curation

Reviewer 2: I just thought that we could be great if we can have a list of mapping which is done automatically - without specifying by user in configuration. This might be a part of transformation-process-reference.md, 2.5 (where we talk about attribute name standardization made after explicit column operations form the config)

Author: Include attribute mapping, reference attribute mapping file. Then provide here also gene ID to gene name mapping

Raw single-cell datasets frequently contain metadata that needs adjustment before it is useful in a cross-study context. Column names may differ between studies, values may be inconsistently coded, fields may be missing, or the biosample identifiers in the cell metadata may not match the naming conventions used by ODM's SLP entities.

The transformation addresses this through a set of configurable column operations applied during extraction. These include renaming columns, dropping irrelevant fields, filling missing values with defaults, and replacing specific values with standardized equivalents. Attribute names are also mapped to ODM standard names where applicable; non-standard names are automatically converted to camelCase to satisfy the ODM API requirements.

> This curation happens in-pipeline, which means the source file is never modified. The curated output exists only as intermediate files in a temporary directory and, ultimately, as the uploaded ODM objects.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Metadata curation is optional, but strongly recommended. It standardizes cell metadata so that it can be imported, linked, and indexed correctly in ODM. Certain fields must use the expected names and data types to ensure consistent linking and indexing. The transformation handles this for the user during processing.

Curation also harmonizes metadata across datasets. This is essential for cross-study search and downstream analysis, because equivalent annotations must be represented consistently. This can include renaming attributes, replacing values with standardized terms, assigning default values, or dropping unnecessary columns. 

Curation is applied only to the data produced by the transformation for import into ODM. The source file is not modified.
```

## Biosample metadata and the aggregation model

A particularly important feature of the transformation is its ability to derive Sample, Library, or Preparation-level metadata directly from the cell metadata. In many single-cell datasets, attributes such as tissue type, disease condition, or donor information are stored as cell-level annotations (one value per cell), even though they logically belong at the biosample level.

The transformation can aggregate these cell-level attributes to the biosample level by grouping cells by a designated biosample identifier column. Only attributes that are constant across all cells belonging to the same biosample are considered eligible for export to SLP metadata. This ensures that the resulting biosample records are coherent and that no per-cell variation is incorrectly collapsed into a biosample-level value.

> Attributes exported to biosample metadata are automatically removed from the cell metadata, preventing duplication. If a biosample attribute should remain in the cell metadata for other reasons, it must be explicitly retained by omitting it from `cell_metadata.columns_to_drop`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some single-cell datasets store tissue, disease, or other biosample-level attributes in cell metadata, repeating the same values for every cell. The transformation can aggregate these attributes into related biosample object: Sample, Library, or Preparation (SLP) objects in ODM.

Aggregation is performed by grouping cells using a designated biosample identifier. Only attributes that are consistent across all cells in the same biosample can be assigned to related biosample objects.

Attributes assigned to biosample objects are automatically removed from the cell metadata. This reduces duplication and improves the overall structure of the imported data. If an attribute must remain in the cell metadata, it must be explicitly retained by omitting it from `cell_metadata.columns_to_drop`.
```

> Attributes exported to biosample metadata are automatically removed from the cell metadata, preventing duplication. If a biosample attribute should remain in the cell metadata for other reasons, it must be explicitly retained by omitting it from `cell_metadata.columns_to_drop`.

Reviewer 2: @isabel-gomez-gs Could you please have a look at this line. I'm not sure how these re-assigned attributes can be omitted from columns_to_drop, if they are to be removed automatically - that I understand as "without explicit mentioning among columns_to_drop".

"If a biosample attribute should remain in the cell metadata for other reasons, it must be explicitly retained by omitting it from `cell_metadata.columns_to_drop`"

Author: Great catch, Maria, thanks! This section is not correct actually, the column will be dropped in any case. I have modified it already

## The linking resolution rules

When the transformation uploads a Cell Group, it must link it to a parent SLP entity. The transformation resolves this target using a defined priority order, so that users do not always need to specify the target explicitly:

1. If the configuration creates new SLP groups, the Cell Group is linked to those newly created groups after they are uploaded.
2. If `cell_metadata.linking_group` explicitly names a target (a sample, library, or preparation accession), that target is used directly.
3. If no explicit target is given, the transformation auto-discovers the appropriate SLP groups for the study from ODM, checking first for Library groups, then Preparation groups, then Sample groups. The first entity type that has at least one group associated with the study is used, and all accessions of that type are linked.

> This priority order reflects the typical ODM study structure: Library groups are usually the most specific and appropriate parent for a Cell Group. If a study only has Sample-level grouping, the transformation falls back gracefully.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Linking created objects

When the transformation uploads a Cell Group, it links it to a parent Sample, Library, or Preparation entity (SLP).

This is usually handled automatically. If the transformation creates new SLP objects, the Cell Group is linked to them. Otherwise, the transformation identifies the most appropriate existing SLP target in ODM. Users can override the automatic behavior by specifying the target explicitly in the configuration.
For details, see [Linking group determination](transformation-process-reference.md#13-linking-group-determination).

The created Expression Group created by the transformation is linked to the corresponding Cell Group .
```

## Dry run mode

Before committing any data to ODM, users can run the transformation in dry run mode. In this mode, the transformation performs all extraction, curation, and validation steps — including resolving the linking target and validating that all cell batch identifiers match existing SLP objects — but uploads nothing. Logs are printed but not saved as attachments.

Dry run mode is particularly useful for exploring which biosample-level attributes are available in a dataset before committing to a curation strategy. When `biosample_metadata` is configured without any `columns_to_export` entries, the dry run will log which columns are uniform per biosample and therefore eligible for export — without creating any files or objects.

> The recommended practice is to iterate on the configuration using repeated dry runs until all warnings are resolved before submitting a full transformation run.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Dry run mode lets users validate the transformation setup before running a full import. In this mode, the transformation performs the initial processing steps, including reading the input, extracting metadata, applying curation, and running validation checks. It skips the most time-consuming output-generation steps, such as creating the expression matrix, and does not upload data to ODM.

Dry run mode is useful for checking that the configuration works as expected and that the required inputs, metadata mappings, and linkage settings are resolved correctly before a full run.

When `biosample_metadata` is configured without any `columns_to_export` entries, dry run mode can also be used to inspect which attributes are uniform within each biosample and therefore eligible for re-assigning.

The recommended approach is to iterate on the configuration using dry runs until warnings are resolved, and then run the full transformation. For details, see [How to iterate on a configuration using dry runs](how-to-sc-hdf5-transformations.md#how-to-iterate-on-a-configuration-using-dry-runs).
```

> ## The API layer: configurations, images, and jobs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Processors Controller API: configurations, images, and jobs
```

**Transformation configurations** are stored JSON documents that describe how a source file should be processed: the input file format, which metadata to extract, and any curation rules to apply. Configurations are created, retrieved, and updated independently of any particular run. This separation means you can refine a configuration through many dry-run iterations without losing the history of changes, and reuse the same configuration across multiple runs or files.

**Transformation images** are versioned, containerized environments that execute the processing logic for a given file format. The image used for single-cell HDF5 files is called `hdf5-cells`. Specifying an image version (e.g. `"latest"` or a specific release tag) allows reproducibility and controlled upgrades when new versions are released.

**Transformation jobs** are the actual execution records. A job binds a configuration and an image to one or more input file accessions, runs the processing pipeline, and produces a log. Each job is independent: you can re-run with a different configuration or image without affecting previous jobs or their results.

> This design allows the configuration to evolve (through iterations of the iterative dry-run cycle) while keeping the job history clean and auditable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The transformation is managed through the ODM Processors Controller API. It is based on three related components: configurations, images, and jobs.

**Transformation configurations** are JSON documents that define how input files should be processed, including the input format, metadata extraction, and curation rules. Configurations can be created, retrieved, and updated independently of any particular run. The same configuration can be reused across multiple files with the same structure.

**Transformation images** are versioned, containerized environments that execute the processing logic for a given file format. The image used for single-cell HDF5 files is called `hdf5-cells`. Specifying an image version (e.g. `"latest"` or a specific release tag) allows reproducibility and controlled upgrades when new versions are released.

are versioned container images that run the processing logic. Available image versions can be queried through the API. The image used for single-cell HDF5 files is `hdf5-cells`. When starting a job, users can specify either `latest` or a specific release tag.

**Transformation jobs** are the execution records. A job combines a configuration, an image, and one or more input files, runs the transformation, and produces the output and logs. Jobs are independent, so the same input can be run again with a different configuration or image when needed.

##Transformation logs

Each transformation job produces a log that records the processing steps, warnings, detected issues, and created outputs. The log also includes provenance information, such as the source file name and accession, and the accessions of the created objects.

As part of the transformation, the log is uploaded to ODM and stored with the study as an attachment alongside the other generated files. This provides a persistent record of the transformation output. Logs are also available through the API for a limited time. By default, this retention period is two weeks.
```

Author: The change has been pushed (not commited directly as there is a duplication in the suggestion)

## Supported input formats

The transformation supports the following HDF5-based input formats:

> - **H5AD (AnnData)** — the native format of the AnnData Python library, widely used in the single-cell ecosystem.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **H5AD (AnnData)** — the native format of the AnnData Python library, widely used in the single-cell data.
```

Author: I would propose "widely used for single-cell data processing"

> - **10x Genomics H5** — converted internally to H5AD before processing, so the extraction logic is unified regardless of the source format.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **10x Genomics H5** — converted internally to H5AD before processing, so the same extraction workflow is used regardless of the input format.
```

> - **Legacy 10x Genomics H5 (v<3)** — supported provided the file contains a single genome. Multi-genome legacy files are not supported.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Legacy 10x Genomics H5 (v<3)** — supported only for files containing a single genome. Multi-genome legacy files are not supported.
```

# Single-Cell HDF5 Transformations Overview

> > **Related documentation:** For step-by-step guidance on running the transformation, see the [How-to Guides](how-to-sc-hdf5-transformations.md). For the full configuration schema, see the [Configuration Reference](configuration-reference.md). For the API endpoints, see the [API Reference](api-reference.md). For the internal processing pipeline, see the [Transformation Process Reference](transformation-process-reference.md). For more information related the Single-cell data support in ODM, see the [Working with Single Cell Data](single-cell.md)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Related documentation:** For a quick start working with Single-cell data see the [End-to-end guide](docs/user-guide/doc-odm-user-guide/quickstart-sc.md). For step-by-step guidance on running the transformation, see the [How-to Guides](how-to-sc-hdf5-transformations.md). For the full configuration schema, see the [Configuration Reference](configuration-reference.md). For the API endpoints, see the [API Reference](api-reference.md). For the internal processing pipeline, see the [Transformation Process Reference](transformation-process-reference.md). For more information related the Single-cell data support in ODM, see the [Working with Single Cell Data](single-cell.md)
```

> > **Related documentation:** To get started quickly with the full upload-to-query workflow, see the [Single-cell data in ODM: Getting Started](quickstart-sc.md). For step-by-step guidance on running the transformation, see the [How-to Guides](how-to-sc-hdf5-transformations.md). For the full configuration schema, see the [Configuration Reference](configuration-reference.md). For the API endpoints, see the [API Reference](api-reference.md). For the internal processing pipeline, see the [Transformation Process Reference](transformation-process-reference.md). For more information related the Single-cell data support in ODM, see the [Working with Single Cell Data](single-cell.md)

Reviewer: This callout lists six cross-links in a single block of prose. It's hard to scan and front-loads the page with navigation before the reader knows what they're navigating away from. Consider converting this to a cleaner "See also" block at the bottom, or trimming it to the two or three most relevant links: the quick start and the how-to guides.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion. I have moved it to a cleaner "See also" block at the bottom

Aggregation is performed by grouping cells using a designated biosample identifier. Only attributes that are consistent across all cells in the same biosample can be assigned to related biosample objects.

Attributes assigned to biosample objects are automatically removed from the cell metadata. This reduces duplication and improves the overall structure of the imported data.

## Linking created objects

When the transformation uploads a Cell Group, it links it to a parent Sample, Library, or Preparation entity (SLP).

This is usually handled automatically. If the transformation creates new SLP objects, the Cell Group is linked to them. Otherwise, the transformation identifies the most appropriate existing SLP target in ODM. Users can override the automatic behavior by specifying the target explicitly in the configuration.
For details, see [Linking group determination](transformation-process-reference.md#13-linking-group-determination).

> The created Expression Group created by the transformation is linked to the corresponding Cell Group .

Reviewer: "created" appears twice in one sentence

Author: Corrected, thank you!
